Whether it is due to the holidays or a personal accomplishment, people love to gift in order to show their appreciation for one another. Just for the 2015 holiday season, it is estimated that the average person in the United States will spend $830 on gifts and that figure rises to $908 when excluding those who won’t be spending at all1. Although our hearts are often in the right place, sometimes it can be difficult to find the right present for someone making it awkward for both the giver and receiver when an unwelcome surprise is revealed from beneath paper and ribbons. It is difficult for us to think from the perspective of the recipient and often, the giver is motivated by their own preferences while shopping for another person. There is also the ordeal of which type of gift to purchase and remembering whether or not the recipient already owns the item.


According to a 2013 poll, about 39% of items purchased around the holidays are for “picky” individuals. Cash often feels impersonal and gift cards can make the best gift since they have the flexibility of cash, but are given and spent like gifts. MasterCard’s 2013 survey showed that 43% of consumers prefer to receive a gift card to purchase hedonic items instead of everyday items because they are able to indulge without feeling guilty. However, choosing which retailer proves to be difficult since so many retailers offer their own gift cards (closed loop) and choosing a VISA gift card (open loop) is too similar to cash which can be seen as a lack of intimacy and thought3.
To produce a less stressful process for the purchaser and a more enjoyable gift for the recipient, analyzing the recipient’s social media can lead to subtle hints revealing retailers who align with their interests.
